---
layout: post
title: 2014 Year in Review
subtitle: An early look back
---

A lot has happened at [SkilStak Coding Art](http://skilstak.com) in 2014
with more to come. Here's a summary.

### Student Growth

It's been fun getting to watch SkilStak grow this year, sometimes in
spite of me. We've grown from 30 students in January to 48 currently
enrolled on our way to hitting the goal of 60 by year end. Each student
contributes something so completely unique yet somehow every one of
them just seems to belong here. I've never been shy about my somewhat
metaphysical conviction that students are led to SkilStak. With no
marketing besides word-of-mouth this seems more true than ever.

### Turnover

Because we never ask for more than a 4-week commitment we have had
some expected turn-over as students find other interests or decide, on
occasion, that programming just isn't their thing. We average three
adds for every one drop with most drops based on school conflicts and
distance.

### Expanded Locations

We looked into moving our location based on suggestions and availability
but have decided to remain at our Catawba location for the foreseeable
future &mdash; especially now that the AC is fixed and local places are
opening where parents can spend time nearby waiting for their
students.

We have had several requests to open a location in South Charlotte but
have no immediate plans to do so focusing instead on increasing capacity
of our Cornelius location. We'd rather provide a phenomenal experience
for few local students than dilute that experience for a lot before we
are ready. That said, several of our students drive as much as an hour
to attend.

### Online Classes

At a friend's emphatic request we attempted an online version of class
identical in every other way to the ones in person. After about a month
it became clear that even though screen sharing with Google Hangouts
works great and provides essentially the same experience supporting
even three students using this approach just doesn't work, not in the
same way as in person anyway. While it is likely we could figure out a
way around this we decided to focus on the unique, in-person, SkilStak
[nano-school](http://robmuh.com/nano-school) experience instead. Happily
he was able to find a similar school in his area.

I am not saying online education doesn't work in general, just that
from my personal experience the ideal is the hyper-focus and attention
available only in person with a small group of students that work well
together. Once I'd experienced it everything else seemed vastly
inferior.

As Salmon Kahn echoes in his **One World Schoolhouse** the Internet is
ideal for independent, individual self-instruction. I'd add it is also
horrible at real-time education. Ironically this conclusion &mdash;
based on recent personal experience &mdash; is completely opposite from
the opinion I held for years while promoting virtual worlds and online
classrooms for education. When you want real-time online, there is IRC,
Twitter and other zero-start-up solutions which are naturally easier to
setup and digest than the heavier virtual world possibilities. Yes
immersion is real in a virtual world, but very few subjects,
particularly just learning to code, do not benefit from it.

### Multiple Class Space Remodels

It still makes some of our original students' parents giggle every
time it happens but the layout of the classroom has changed
organically to meet what seems best for those coming here. Ironically
after having removed tables last year we are back to them again only
better and with more space.

We bumped up the maximum class size from three to four after the
improvements and this seems sustainable going forward increasing
maximum school class enrollment to 68 and Saturday camp enrollment to
16.

### Attendance and Billing Improvements




### Ubuntu Linux Server on a Stick

### Web Sites: Bellalove, Tawbawalk

### Reincorporation in North Carolina

### "Raw Code" Class Format

### Research: Learning to Code Resource Recommendations

### Research: Learning to Code Educational Paths

### OpenSource: studio.code.org -> Python Port

### Python Tutorial: Battleship

### GameMaker Tutorial: RPG Movement

### GameMaker Tutorial: RPG Movement

### GameMaker Tutorial: Perfect Platformer

### Python Module: gamegrid

### Python Module: storylib

### Book: A Code Wizard's First Spellbook

### Summer Camps

### CorneliusNews.net Article

SkilStak has enjoyed very good word-of-mouth marketing allowing us
to make the school great instead of telling everyone how great it is.
SkilStak would not be in business if it were not for this amazing effort
by the students and parents here.

Still, when CorneliusNews.net approached asking for an interview it
was great to see the school and students get some good positive
attention. Thanks to that article we have Jack and William and I could
not imagine the school without them. The article perfectly captures
why SkilStak exists and where we want to go with it.

### Ubuntu Linux Desktop on a Stick

### Saturday Minecraft Camps

### Saturday Gamer Camps

### Bailey Code Club

### SkilBux

### T-Shirts, Bumber Stickers

### Parents' Class

### Day-Time Classes

SkilStak classes are currently only after school and on Saturdays but
we hope to add at least one day-time class in 2014 mostly for those
who are home-schooled. Day-time classes will be from 2:00-3:30 so as
to not interfere with the regular 9-2 Summer Camp hours. If successful
most day-time classes will be added increasing the maximum enrollment
from 68 to 

