---
layout: post
title: Social Media Links
subtitle: Twitter and Pintrest and Facebook &mdash; Oh My
---

[Oh My][] is not a new social media fad (even though George Takai could
start one and instantly convert millions). But ask yourself this question
(and your little dog too), "Am I a good widget witch or a bad one?" Yes
social media is everywhere. Now stop reminding us. We get it.

### Don't tell me. Show me.

First off, I was a premium [offender][] here. Once upon a time I created
the most entertaining, amazing, about page I could imagine. *Oh god what
was I thinking.*


I don't know about you, but I get annoyed when the only way to follow
a blogger on Twitter is clicking the *Follow Me* button with the birdie
in it. I need more information before I commit. By going to the blog
author's twitter feed I get to see quickly all I really need to know
about that person:

* How the describe themselves without unlimited word-counts
* How much content they produce
* How much they engage others in their community
* Where else they may be blogging or active
* Other people like them (friends and Twitter suggestions)

Now see, you just denied me all that by only having a glowing *About*
page and/or that little *Follow Me* button.

### And not just Twitter ...

If you had given me a link to your GitHub I could instantly see if you
are actually worth following as well.

By having a link to your social media the reader gets an instant
profile of you without you having to spout about yourself in an about
page on your blog. Yet another opportunity for laziness. You maintain
your profiles in Social media then refer readers there.


### Widgets clutter

### Widgets cover

Including a link


[Oh My]: 
[offender]: http://web.archive.org/web/20090918084821/http://imohax.com/about/
