---
layout: post
tags: writing, dharma, drive
---

You know those quiet moments of absolute, sublime clarity, those times
when you somehow understand everything you are and everything you are
meant to do? They don't come often for most. People go years without ever
having one. But if you've had one then you may relate to the reason this
blog exists.

I realize there is very little chance anyone reading these words won't
find them at least a little pretentious, maybe even narcissistic. Unlike
some from history, I'm not saying the Gods on high descended to present me
with seer sight, apostle acumen, and a mage's magic quill (in the form of
a bad keyboard). In fact, I suck at writing (and often at life), which might be
the very reason I *need* to write. Putting thoughts to words changes us,
which is why sharing them isn't necessarily conceit or even
self-promotion. It's what makes us human. We think, record, share, and
learn. No other animal does. The world improves as people from all walks
of life and culture choose to share, so share I must, which is why I
learned French and Russian and why I feel so strongly everyone should
learn a foreign language and live outside their home country when
possible.

There was a time when people who hungered for human exchange with those of
similar interest and motivation, or even those with whom they violently
disagreed, had pen-pals and waited months for written words from one
another. Yes there was 'trolling' and 'flaming' but much less. It just
took too long. Now our kids learn to type before they can write and
exchange words with others all around the world. This ease seems to have
fostered contempt, division, and combined with anonymity to produce
unprecedented hate and disrespect. If we are honest with ourselves, we
likely have to admit treating someone as less than human because we did
not face them in person. I know I have.

But most of the time the Internet proves what a miracle it is by bringing
people together that might never have met, my wife and I, for example.
Hopefully the practice of writing to share can help me and others regain
the civility humanity at least seems to have conveyed during the age when
words could fade on paper from the slightest rain.

After all, that's the point isn't it?
