---
layout: post
title: Comments
subtitle: A overly analytical consideration of the humble comment
---

New takes on commenting force us to make some tough decisions on what used
to be a no-brainer. In the end, comments should come at the end, if at
all. In-line commenting popularized by [Medium][] seems cool at first but
upon deeper consideration disjoints, clutters, and confuses.

### Why comment at all?

This is the first question we should be asking. Social media has
caused a lot of prolific bloggers to ask this question ---
particularly those that don't like wasting time with comment
moderation.

Python dropped commenting

Most technical bloggers refer to other threads like ycombinator

The two approaches boil down to:

1. Comments show community/tribe/followers I care
1. Comments waste our time and become irrelevant distractions

"The most valuable thing about that blog post was something I read in
the comments clarifying."

Comments lock you into your current content

1. You write post
1. Someone writes a comment noting you need clarification
1. You clarify the post by changing it
1. The comment is no longer relevant and confuses other readers
1. You now have to remove comment, but did you clarify enough?
1. Commenter has moved on.
1. Will commenter be offended by removing it?

1. Do you have the time to micro-manage comments?


### A database just for your comments? Really?

Do you still have 2004 Wordpress comments? Oh god help you.

### But not everyone has Twitter/Facebook/YCombinator

My favorite is "Discuss this on Hacker News" (which has an elitist
approach to even being able to participate, which is just stupid, not
elite).

## But Disqus is so slow to load

First consider how much faster it is than Wordpress DB comments.

Then consider how much more visibility your content gets by including
the discussion in Disqus and Google searches.

This is the main reason why things like [inlineDisqussion][] --- while
cool to see can be implemented --- seem like the worse of both to me.

Put it at the end.

[Medium]: http://medium.com
[inlineDisqussion]: http://tsi.github.io/inlineDisqussions/
