---
layout: post
---

Jade not only makes it faster and less error-prone to code web apps,
it produces better html closer to what you probably intended.

Take the following example from common button bar usage:

```html
<div id="navbuttons">
  <a href="#a" class="navbutton"><i class="fa fa-th"></i></a>
  <a href="#b" class="navbutton"><i class="fa fa-rocket"></i></a>
</div>
```
Even with [htmlmin][] and the other HTML minifiers out there set to remove
whitespace the annoying line return does not get eliminated but converted
into a single space, which makes the margin of your block link buttons too
big on the right. (I actually ran into this creating [Thumble][].)

Now there are a lot of clever ways to fix this, and the not-so-clever
and very ugly solution of putting them all on the same line. But after
10 minutes of searching and editing to change icon names this quickly
passed my lazy-coder threshold triggering the inevitable search for
something better. Then I found Jade, again:

```jade
#navbuttons
  a.thumble-btn(href='#a')
    i.fa.fa-phone
  a.thumble-btn(href='#b')
    i.fa.fa-rocket
```

Instantly my problem was solved without any minification even applied.

I had encountered Jade a while back when considering a template engine
for yet another attempt at a 100% node static blogging engine, (a need
which has easily been met by [assemble][] and a bunch of other
solutions). At the time I was cautious about adopting another format
for HTML in much the way that most of the mainstream JavaScript
community has considered and dismissed the use of [CoffeeScript][]
(and for good reason, imho).

But HTML is an entirely different beast --- especially today in the age
where 'compiling' your CSS is standard practice for any web app and even
the simplest web sites and for good reason. [Gulp][], [JShint][], [CSSmin][],
[Stylus][], and [autoprefix][] make any other web development workflow
seems downright archaic once you've experienced them. And if you are
part of a small, agile organization (like [skilstak_][]) then there is
really no excuse not to use them.

One of the best advantages of Jade is that you can easily choose
between a pretty-printed HTML output form when creating demo HTML that
will be viewed by others and ultra-efficient, minified HTML in
conjunction with other Gulp stream plugins.
