---
layout: post
title: IBM, Bubye, 14 Years were Too Much
---

Taking a job at IBM was the worst mistake of my career, it just took
me 14 years to realize it.

Before I get into this I realize many will conclude I'm burning bridges. I suppose I am but would hope 

In 2000 I really didn't want to work for IBM, but the recruiter made
me an offer my wife and I found hard to refuse: $45,000 more than
I was currently making at Nike. IBM was full into the *Peace, Love and
Linux* campaign and I bought it.

While I am sure it was time to move on, IBM was not the place
I belonged, somehow I knew that, but I went anyway.

### Small companies give life, big ones suck it away



### Great people. A few amazing projects.

### Work from home.

### "Punished for Innovation"

Jive Departure.

### Institutional contempt for employees

### Peace, Love and Linux Lies

Insiders only. Bought company in Beaverton

### Virtual Fail

When I criticized IBM for it's promotion of a walled-garden approach
rather than an open one I was told, "I just can't take the risk."

### IBM stopped caring about meeting your team face-to-face

Sent myself at my own cost.

### IBM employees always have old hardware

IBM never has a current machine for you. Most of the time I used my
own systems because I didn't want to go through the arduous process
of justifying more computing power, I mean, refreshing my computer
more than two years old.

### Waste, waste and more waste

### Full of bozos

### Conservative command and conquer culture

### Dumber Planet

