---
layout: post
subtitle: The secret of the Jedi is direct, constant, personal mentoring
---

Learning happens best independently with personal guidance and motivation
from an experienced, available mentor preferably in person. Distance
education, [MOOCs][], elearning, virtual classrooms and all the other
modern takes on education will *never* be as good.

No duh, right? This is really a no-brainer. Humans have been passing skills and
information between one another on a personal small scale from the very
beginning. Whether you believe in evolution or creation this fact remains.
The most effective learning happens when an individual wants to learn and
has someone who knows what they want to lean in front of them, or, maybe
to the side of them, or on the phone or video chat or ethereal hologram.

It's no surprise then that video is often the next best way to make
this information transfer happen. Video tricks our brains into
thinking that person is right next to us. But it still lacks
something.

### Do souls matter?

Could there be something to personal presence? What if being physically in
the room with someone provides something beyond the obvious reasons that
facilitate learning. Yes this sounds very new-age, 'cuz it is, sort of.
But what if it is actually old-age, or original-age. You know that feeling
you get when you hold a baby. It is undeniable. You are learning something
in that moment; or how about that friendly conversation over a beer or
dinner and then later realizing you learned a ton without formally
considering it; what about that one teacher that you just connected with
so well you felt like you were learning just standing next to them; and of
course there are those wise apparitions that bring you knowledge in ways
you rational mind finds a way of dismissing. What they don't appear to
you?

While I haven't found any direct research, which would be nearly
impossible to isolate given all the other factors of physical presence
that contribute to better learning, I have felt this a lot --- especially
when teaching language labs.

### Comedian language lab instructors

Conversational language labs require almost a stand-up comic mentality
to keep people engaged and enjoying the lingual contortions and
hacking up of untrained phonemes. Instant praise and
disarming fears is essential to get anyone to learn a language because
you have to make those noises in front of someone else who actually
knows what they are suppose to sound like. This is why having children
around who speak your target language helps so much. The fear is
removed, which brings me to the main reason I think in-person learning
is far-and-away the best.

### Fear kills learning

The arch nemesis of learning is fear, fear of failure, fear of not being
smart enough, even fear of being successful and the change it will bring.
It's kinda the worst thing about this life and perhaps the number one
obstacle to a lot more than learning, love, tolerance, progress, research,
exploration, kindness, peace. Fear kills them all. It really sucks. Even
Yoda agrees it 'leads to anger, and anger leads to suffering.' In
[Defending Your Life][] the writers even suggest getting over are fears is the
number one reason and purpose for life, lest we return to work on
conquering them again. I know anecdotal references to great films will
make the academic set cringe but intuitively we understand this stuff ---
especially Lucas who studied humanity through Campbell's well-researched
perspectives on what make humans tick at a deep, archetypal level.

### Personal presence conveys caring, assuages fear

### The world needs more mentors, not more teachers

What the world needs now is love, sweet love, it's the only thing that
there's just too little of, which is probably exactly why more people
don't take up being mentors to others. Those teachers that go through
all the pain and suffering and personal sacrifice to become teachers
so often burn out when their pure love of learning and helping is run
over by 2-ton truck full of policies, procedures, and administrative
requirements, not to mention all the money that doesn't go to them but
to the system that claims to support them.




[MOOCs]:
http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/new_scientist/2014/03/mooc_survey_students_of_free_online_courses_are_educated_employed_and_male.html
